---
layout: post
author: cozziekuns
title: Find a Friend
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

**_Anyone can play solitaire._**

A friend of mine once posited that they could make a strong mahjong bot simply by running a 
machine-learning model tuned towards maximising agari-rate. Fortunately for us humans, mahjong is 
not such a simple game. What mahjong is not about is winning hands; after all, anyone can play 
solitaire. What mahjong really is about is _winning games_. And, like in life, trying to go it 
alone is a bad idea; the best way to win is often to _find a friend_. 

![4-1](/assets/img/4-1.png)

What should we discard here? The first thing that anyone should do before deciding what to discard, 
is to take stock of the current situation. Currently, we're in ORAS with a decently comfortable 
lead over 3rd and 4th. Normally, the first thing you should be thinking when even a mangan direct 
from 3rd or 4th will keep you in 3rd place is to aim for 1st. Unfortunately, 1st place is more than 
a haneman tsumo away from us; in order to even think about taking 1st place, we'd need to form a 
haneman class hand, and then pray we flip some ura dora on the tsumo for a baiman, or pray that 1st 
place plays into us. 

Aiming for 1st place here is not only unrealistic, it puts us in danager of falling into 3rd. While 
we do have a comfortable lead over 3rd and 4th, that lead is rather fickle; a mangan tsumo from 
either player will put us into 3rd, and we would end up losing a precious +45 dan points that 
should've been all but secured. Worse, if we end up riiching and flying too close to the sky, we 
might end up with some clipped wings as we play into a mangan from 4th place, and end up in last 
place due to the thousand points we pay with the riichi stick.

So the goal of this hand should be to secure 2nd place. There are actually a few ways we can 
accomplish this. The first, and most straightforward method, would be to of course win a hand. 
While two turns in it does look like our hand is pretty fast, this is one of those hands where 
it'll be hard to secure a yaku that isn't riichi. Pinfu is probably the closest candidate, to a 
yaku that we can use, but it's just as likely that we'll end up completing our ryanmen before our 
bad waits, and be stuck with a hand we need to riichi in order to win.

We also have the choice to rely on our kamicha. It goes without saying, but if kamicha wins any 
hand, the game will end and we'll end up in second. Unfortunately, this isn't the most reliable 
strategy either. Not only is kamicha in a situation where they're incentivised to fold (as they are 
last oya with an obscene lead), even if they did have a quick hand, the only way we could assist 
them would be by blocking off our simocha from calling. This leaves us at the mercy of toimen; if 
toimen riichi's and tsumos a mangan, bye-bye 2nd place.

Which brings us to my favourite method; feed simocha! We can leverage the fact that simocha must 
favour speed over value due to the amount of duress he is under from toimen. Not only is toimen 
within 2000 points of simocha, his first and second discards (8m -> hatsu tedashi) signal a quicker 
than usual hand. Furthermore, since this is aka-ari mahjong, toimen's condition of escaping third 
(2000 points) is essentially a given, with how easy it is to use the dora, and the existence of 
aka-dora. If we are able to convince simocha to start calling, we can reduce the average value of 
their hand and thereby reduce the chance that we'll fall into third place via a mangan tsumo.

Due to how irregular simocha's discards are, we can already deduce so much about their hand. 
Simocha's first and second drop was both a 9p from inside of their hand; they explicitly dropped a 
toitsu of routouhai from the very start. From this, we can conclude that are almost surely going 
for a tanyao hand. If they were going for a closed riichi hand, they would keep the 9p in their 
hand to use as a pair or potential ankou. If they had a yakuhai toitsu, that would give them even 
more reason to keep the 9p toitsu, as it is a very easy toitsu to pon. The 9p toitsu drop also 
tells us that their hand is most likely decently quick and locked into a kuitan shape; if it were 
slower, it would make more sense to fish for yakuhai or try to form a pinfu shape instead of trying 
to force kuitan.

This makes simocha and extremely good candidate to feed. It's almost as if simocha was signaling to 
us through the 9p toitsu drop that we should feed them! If this was the actual intention from the 
9p toitsu drop, then I have nothing but the upmost respect for them as a player.

In the actual game, I ended up dropping 6m -> 4m in an attempt to feed simocha some tiles they 
could call for kuitan. While 6m passed, 4m was a kanchan neck that simocha needed to call to get 
into tenpai. Simocha then decided to call the 7p that I later dropped to improve their wait. With 
two dora-less mentsu showing, and two dora in my hand (I had picked up 4s on a later draw), the 
chance of simocha having a mangan potential hand have all but disappeared. Kamicha decided to join 
in the fun, breaking up a 3p from one of their mentsu in an attempt to sashikomi into simocha. 
Miraculously, Simocha calls ron on the 3p, winning their 1000 point hand. 1st, 2nd and 3rd place 
have all achieved their separate goals, and all with minimal risk.

By leveraging both the point situation and my read of simochas hand, I confirmed my 2nd place 
without having to play any real sort of RNG game. I removed myself from the round (as did kamicha), 
and instead funneled resources into making simocha's hand as cheap and fast as possible. Simiocha 
obliged, since they were being threatened by toimen, and by working together, we were able to each 
achieve our goals with minimal risk.

Remember this: anyone can play solitaire. But Mahjong is a four-player game. The crux of good 
mahjong play is to identify each other player's best interests, and form alliances when a player's 
interests aligns with yours. Every round, you should be looking to find a friend. If you refuse to 
forge friendships, you'll find yourself at the mercy of the only friend you can't trust: Luck.

**See you on Tenhou.**