---
layout: post
author: cozziekuns
title: Calm Aggression
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Last weekend, I participated in the Pacific Mahjong League Riichi Mahjong Open in San Francisco. 
After a strong start, I ended placing a rather dissapointing overall 20th from of a pool, of 52 
players, which was a big miss from my goal of ending up in the top 8. While I can chalk up some 
of my poor play to my inexperience with the particular ruleset (WRC), a large and surprising amount 
of crucial mistakes made throughout the tournament were in regards to simple push-fold decisions. 

Although I'm not sure how much it shows in my demeanour, I am in general a very extreme person. 
When I'm confident, my entire body is brimming with confidence and I feel as if I can outplay every 
micro-situtation. When I feel the slighest pang of fear, I'm often much too defensive, cowering 
away from battles that are obviously better fought. And the worst is when I'm nervous; unable to 
accurately assess situations rationally, I tend to err towards poor, overly aggressive judgements, 
justifying them with oversimplified rationalizations. Of course, in doing so, I end up pushing many 
hands better left folded. This violent overagression, coupled with my irrational fear left me 
bleeding points that I shouldn't have bled, and missing out on points I should've won.

Shogi is a board game that I've been enamoured with ever since reading the manga "March Comes In 
Like a Lion." As opposed to chess, where material advantage is much more pronounced, shogi is a 
game that emphasises speed and fighting for initiative. It is not rare for shogi players to 
sacrifice key pieces like the bishop or the rook, if it will give them momentum for their upcoming 
attack. The ease at which the initiatve can swing in shogi makes planning ahead all the more 
important; a violent attack may seem winning for a player, but if that attack is exhausted and all 
the firepower has been extinguished, it is a simple exercise for the opponent to seize the 
initiative and forge a counterattack.

The most influential player in the history of modern shogi, Yoshiharu Habu, plays with a very calm 
and tempered aggression. Instead of panicking when a threat is being posed to his camp, and 
directly commiting to an obvious attacks, he will often correctly identify that he has the time to 
make calculated in-between moves, which he uses to eek out the smallest of advantages in 
preparation for breaching the opponent's castle. Rarely does a pre-medidated attack that Habu 
commits to fail. This ability to calmly scrap for small advantages admist the chaos of the shogi 
board is his biggest strength. It is this exact strength of Habu's that I wish to emulate on the 
mahjong table.

While the parallels may be hard to see at first, Mahjong is, much like shogi, a game of moments and 
initiative. Unfortunately for Mahjong players, we are not afforded the same freedoms that shogi 
players are given. In mahjong, initiatves are both created by and stolen through coincidence. 
However, the same general concepts still apply; if we end up over-commiting ourselves to a violent 
attack, we may end up losing the initiative and find ourselves facing a counterattack.

![5-1](/assets/img/5-1.png)

This is one such example where calling riichi is simply much too violent. While in most situations 
taking the micro-initiative with a dealer riichi should be a no-brain play, this is a rather 
unusual scenario where a riichi doesn't afford us much in terms of gain.

What exactly is the cost of calling riichi in this situtation? While riichi is often an unusually 
strong yaku with many advantages and few demerits, in this situation the demerits are much more 
pronounced, and as afformentioned the advantages that calling riichi gives us are effectively 
neutered.

I will not deny that  tsumoing a dealer mangan in this situation would be decisive, but how much 
different would it be from tsumoing our guarneteed 4-han 20-fu hand? In both cases, there is a 
10000 point gap or higher between all other players on the table. The extra points from the mangan 
tsumo would akin to taking a 90% chance of 1st place, and turning it into a 95% chance of achieving 
1st place. The diminished rewards of the mangan tsumo are not worth the cost of calling riichi.

An argument can be made for the extra points from ron, but expecting the 58s to come out of your 
opponents's hand post riichi with this board state and 5s dora is, quite simply, understimating 
your opponents.

As for demerits, riichi risks alienating our biggest friend on the board: toimen. Toimen is 
currently our partner in crime, as toimen is the one player on the board that is desperately 
fighting to scrap for any points possible, since even 2000 points would put them in mangan tsumo 
range of simocha in all-last. Toimen winning the hand is actually the best case scenario, since 
that would put extra pressure onto simocha, who would be third place going into all-last. This 
means that they would not have the freedom to make a big hand in ORAS, since toimen would be 
breathing down their neck.

So we are fine with toimen winning the hand, provided they do not win off of us. If we do call 
riichi, toimen will be incentivised to fight against us if they are anywhere near tenpai. If things 
do end up going south, we could find ourselves paying in a mangan class hand (given that we 
see no dora, this is perhaps more likely than not), to someone we didn't really need to fight. We 
should instead play nice and avoid potential conflict with our friends.

In fact if toimen, kamicha or simocha win the hand, we'll still most likely be going into all-last 
with a comfortable lead, **so long as they don't win off of us**. Even if kamicha wins their hand, 
it is most likely a 3-han 30-fu hand, and we'll head into all-last as temporary top. The 
single-noten case is essentially equivalent to this. If we end up calling riichi, we'll be in an 
awkward situation where our dora-less hand is fighting against hands that we don't need to fight.

![5-2](/assets/img/5-2.png)

In this actual game, I decided (perhaps too aggresively) to push up to the 8p while staying dama. 
I then calmly folded after drawing 6p. The risk of pressing for an agari at this point of the game 
is not worth the potential reward. Again, even if I end the hand in single noten, going into 
all-last with a temporary top is more than enough compensation. The round ended up going to 
ryuukyoku, and I ended up taking 1st after toimen tsumo'd a hand (which was unfortunately not 
enough to get them into 3rd, since they did not flip uradora).

Before committing to an attack, make sure to consider the state of the board, and forge a path with 
that information in mind. The scariest players are the ones that are capable of camly assessing the 
situation and making quiet steps forward. no matter what amount of duress they are under. Make a 
calm assessment of the situation and utilise that information to correctly choose your battles. 
I don't think it's an exaggeration to say that a master of this skill alone could become, as Habu 
has, the best in the world.

**See you on Tenhou.**